feat: Add subscriptions support to ktor server (#1774)
ExpediaGroup/graphql-kotlin: website/docs/server/ktor-server/ktor-subscriptions.md

---
id: ktor-subscriptions
title: Subscriptions
---
_To see more details on how to implement subscriptions in your schema, see the schema generator docs on [executing subscriptions](../../schema-generator/execution/subscriptions.md).
This page lists the `graphql-kotlin-ktor-server` specific features._

## Prerequisites

To start using Subscriptions, you may need install [WebSockets](https://ktor.io/docs/websocket.html) plugin to your Ktor server config.
```kotlin
install(WebSockets)
```
See [plugin docs](https://ktor.io/docs/websocket.html#configure) to get more info about the `WebSocketOptions` configuration.

## Flow Support

> `graphql-kotlin-ktor-server` provides support for Kotlin `Flow` by automatically configuring `FlowSubscriptionSchemaGeneratorHooks`
> and `FlowSubscriptionExecutionStrategy` beans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`graphql-kotlin-ktor-server` provides support for Kotlin `Flow` by automatically configuring schema generation process with `FlowSubscriptionSchemaGeneratorHooks`
and GraphQL execution with `FlowSubscriptionExecutionStrategy`.
```

:::info
If you define your subscriptions using Kotlin `Flow`, make sure to extend `FlowSubscriptionSchemaGeneratorHooks` whenever you need to provide some custom hooks.
:::

## WebSocket Sub-protocols

We have implemented subscriptions in Ktor WebSockets following the [`graphql-transport-ws`](https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-ws/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md) sub-protocol.
This one is enabled by default if you don't override the config:

```kotlin
install(Routing) {
    graphQLSubscriptionsRoute()
}
```

If you would like to implement your own subscription handler, e.g. to support another sub-protocol, you can provide your implementation to the `graphQLSubscriptionsRoute`
as shown below:

```kotlin
install(Routing) {
    graphQLSubscriptionsRoute(handlerOverride = MyOwnSubscriptionsHandler())
}
```

> ## Subscription Hooks
> 
> In line with the Apollo protocol, we have implemented hooks to execute functions at different stages of the connection lifecycle.
> If you would like to implement your own subscription hooks, you can provide your own implementation of `KtorGraphQLSubscriptionHooks`. The default implementation does not perform any actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Subscription Execution Hooks

Subscription execution hooks allow you to "hook-in" to the various stages of the connection lifecycle and execute custom logic based on the event. By default, all subscription execution hooks are no-op.
If you would like to provide some custom hooks, you can do so by providing your own implementation of `KtorGraphQLSubscriptionHooks`.
```

```kotlin
install(WebSockets)
```
See the [plugin docs](https://ktor.io/docs/websocket.html#configure) to get more info about the WebSocketOptions configuration.

## Flow Support

`graphql-kotlin-ktor-server` provides automatic support for Kotlin `Flow` by automatically configuring `FlowSubscriptionSchemaGeneratorHooks`
and `FlowSubscriptionExecutionStrategy` beans.

:::info
If you define your subscriptions using Kotlin `Flow`, make sure to extend `FlowSubscriptionSchemaGeneratorHooks` whenever you need to provide some custom hooks.
:::

## WebSocket Protocols

There are two default GraphQL over WebSocket protocol implementations supported out of the box.

If you would like to implement your own subscription handler, you can provide it to the `graphQLSubscriptionsRoute`
as shown below:

```kotlin
install(Routing) {
    graphQLSubscriptionsRoute(handlerOverride = MyOwnSubscriptionsHandler(...))
}
```

### `graphql-transport-ws` (default)

See [graphql-transport-ws](https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-ws/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md)

This one is enabled by default if you don't override the config:

```kotlin
install(Routing) {
    graphQLSubscriptionsRoute()
}
```

> ### `subscriptions-transport-ws` (legacy)

Reviewer: this was just dropped so lets update the docs to reflect it

Author: right, updated 👍
